\chapter*{Acknowledgements}\markboth{Acknowledgements}{Acknowledgements}

\subsection*{First edition}

The three volumes \TUTORIAL, \DESCRIPTION\ and \REFERENCE\ were
produced at the Cambridge Research Center of SRI International with
the support of DSTO Australia.

The \HOL\ documentation project was managed by Mike Gordon, who also
wrote parts of \DESCRIPTION\ and \TUTORIAL\ using material based on an
early paper describing the \HOL\ system\footnote{M.J.C.\ Gordon, `HOL:
  a Proof Generating System for Higher Order Logic', in: {\it VLSI
    Specification, Verification and Synthesis\/}, edited by G.\
  Birtwistle and P.A.\ Subrahmanyam, (Kluwer Academic Publishers,
  1988), pp.\ 73--128.} and {\sl The ML Handbook\/}\footnote{{\sl The
    ML Handbook}, unpublished report from Inria by Guy Cousineau, Mike
  Gordon, G\'erard Huet, Robin Milner, Larry Paulson and Chris
  Wadsworth.}.  Other contributers to \DESCRIPTION\ incude Avra Cohn,
who contributed material on theorems, rules, conversions and tactics,
and also composed the index (which was typeset by Juanito Camilleri);
Tom Melham, who wrote the sections describing type definitions, the
concrete type package and the `resolution' tactics; and Andy Pitts,
who devised the set-theoretic semantics of the \HOL\ logic and wrote
the material describing it.

The original document design used \LaTeX\ macros supplied by Elsa
Gunter, Tom Melham and Larry Paulson.  The typesetting of all three
volumes was managed by Tom Melham.  The cover design is by Arnold
Smith, who used a photograph of a `snow watching lantern' taken by
Avra Cohn (in whose garden the original object resides).  John Van
Tassel composed the \LaTeX\ picture of the lantern.

Many people other than those listed above have contributed to the
\HOL\ documentation effort, either by providing material, or by
sending lists of errors in the first edition.  Thanks to everyone who
helped, and thanks to DSTO and SRI for their generous support.

\subsection*{Later editions}

The second edition of \REFERENCE\ was a joint effort by the Cambridge
\HOL\ group.

The third edition of all three volumes represents a wide-ranging and
still incomplete revision of material written for HOL88 so that it
applies to the \textsf{hol98} system a decade later.  The third edition
has been prepared by Konrad Slind and Michael Norrish.


